uh good afternoon to everyone out there
i'm barry through executive director of
gray area and it's my great privilege to
welcome you all to the opening keynote
conversation of gray area festival 2021
worlding protocol
uh this is our seventh year of gray area
festival and although we're all sad to
not be able to hold our conference in
person again this year
we are proud to be able to present an
extraordinary lineup of artists
researchers technologists online
with free access to anyone thanks to the
support of the national endowment for
the arts
of course we can only continue to
produce amazing programming like what
you're going to experience this week
with the support of you our audience
and so if you are able to please upgrade
to a paying membership to help sustain
this creative community we try and
cultivate
as well as receive other benefits
year-round and you can get in touch with
us to talk about that
um this festival couldn't happen without
the tireless efforts of
what i think is the hardest working arts
team on the planet
so my deepest gratitude goes to seabrook
matt joy victoire tiffany nikki matt
hannah the dove
all our other volunteers and uh for
making this happen
um and to all the participants in this
year's festival for showing up with
extremely important and boundary pushing
work
now i'd like to introduce the curator of
this year's festival wade wallerstein
wade is founder of silicon valley and
co-director of transfer gallery that's
been supporting
digital arts arts and technology for
years
he's extremely knowledgeable and
supporting of arts and culture and i
can't speak highly enough of the program
he's put together for us all this year
which hopefully we can now hear some
more about
hi everyone and thanks so much for the
warm welcome barry
i'm really excited to be here with
everyone today
this is the first day of the great area
festival worlding protocol program and
as barry said this show was really a
labor of love from the whole community
who came together around this idea of
world building
before i begin i want to make a few
acknowledgements first and foremost we
at grey area acknowledge that we are
located on the unseated ancestral
homeland of the ramatish oloni peoples
who are the original inhabitants of the
san francisco peninsula we recognize
that as the original stewards of this
land the ramay tischoloni understood the
interconnectedness of all things and
maintained harmony with nature for
millennia and we honor theology peoples
for their enduring commitment to mother
earth
we wish to pay our respects by
acknowledging the ancestors elders and
relatives of the ramatish community and
by affirming their sovereign rights as
first peoples
so with that said
what is worlding protocol all about
worlding is a mode of interdependent
interspecies planetary perception and
protocol are the computational
infrastructures that organize our
mediated experience
as our species take stock from a still
uncontained global pandemic it's clear
that the entangled web of ecological
economic and social crisis that we face
demands planetary scale cooperation
even with the promise of technologies
enabling real-life real-time simulation
distributed financial systems and
geoengineering
exclusionary and extractive power
structures persist rendering purely
technical solutions ineffective
anything is possible yet nothing really
seems to change
for the seventh edition of grey area
festival we present worlding protocol a
survey of interdisciplinary creators
drawing upon indigenous knowledge
transhumanist philosophies regenerative
ecologies and autonomous organizations
to imagine new relational ontologies
beyond utopian and fatalist world views
how do we negotiate the balance between
our individual freedom and communal
dependencies and what practical reality
can we all build together
there is such an inspiring lineup of
thinkers and creators who have taken a
leap with us to explore what a new
worlding protocol might look like and i
really hope you'll stick around all week
for contributions from benjamin bratton
and audrey tang shuli chang
wendy chen cheyenne concepcion jeremy
couillard
am dark dawn xyz
oria harvey joey holder
kia kreutler he sue kwan
lojenie mcmillan vernell a a noel
chiari rubeau
nathan schaefer scotlandi
sister lady bianca then mosey sound
rajon sammy velar mckenzie work peter wu
and chan chanyee
i'm also really excited to share that we
have three performances by valencia
james kaiken and huntress over the
course of the festival for more info and
if you want to check out the full lineup
head to gray area festival dot io
later this week i'm going to be joined
by two of my favorite curators doreen
rios and julia greenway who will help me
moderate a series of talks and
discussions with all of the great area
participants
and finally i'm going to note that as
part of the festival we have created an
immersive virtual exhibition in new art
city
the show is titled diorama and each of
the artists contributions is housed
within a virtual architecture designed
by a new art city gallery director sammy
vieler where portals to artists create
created worlds are posed in neat
dioramas
this show works by replicating the
diorama exhibiting technique employed by
museums for centuries diorama's
installation offers a new phenomenology
that critiques and expands upon the
material limitations and affordances of
red web ready
simulated exhibition formats underwater
caves balmy coastlines warp star fields
cyber
cyberpunk cityscapes and more converge
in a kaleidoscopic panorama of what is
and is impossible
that was super long-winded so thank you
all very much for being here and with
that i'll pass it back to you barry
thank you wade um we'll go now right
into our opening keynote conversation i
just needed to note briefly that during
the end
the very end uh we had some technical
problems that uh caused benjamin bratton
to to drop off um so we didn't quite get
to close it up with a neat bow but it
was a long and very compelling it is a
long and very compelling conversation
um
uh that deals with a wide range of
topics so that's that's kind of what's
going on at the end but um i think we'll
all find it extremely valuable in its
entirety so
here we go
hello i'm barry through executive
director at gray area and on behalf of
everyone at gray area i would like to
welcome you to this opening keynote
conversation for gray area festival 2021
worlding protocol
this discussion between benjamin bratton
and audrey tang was held on october 6th
it builds off the themes in bratton's
new book the revenge of the real which
envisions a new positive biopolitics
that recognizes that governance is
literally a matter of life and death
we are grappling with multiple
interconnected dilemmas climate change
pandemics and the tensions between the
individual and society
all of which have to be addressed on a
planetary scale
coven 19 exposed the pre-existing
conditions of the current global crisis
many western states failed to protect
their populations while others were able
to suppress the virus only with sweeping
social restrictions
in contrast many asian countries were
able to make much more precise
interventions
everywhere lockdowns transformed
everyday life introducing an
epidemiological view of society based on
sensing modeling and filtering
the book asks what lessons are there to
be learned
benjamin bratton's work spans philosophy
architecture computer science and
geopolitics
he is professor of visual arts at
university of california san diego
he is program director of the
terraforming and new normal programs at
stroke institute he is also a professor
of digital design at the european
graduate school and visiting professor
at psyarc in nyu shanghai
in addition to the revenge of the reel
he's author of the stack on software and
sovereignty
audrey tang is a taiwanese free software
programmer and digital minister of
taiwan who has been described as one of
the 10 greatest taiwanese computing
personalities
in august 2016 tang was invited to join
taiwan's executive yuan as minister
without portfolio making her the first
transgender and first non-binary
official in the top executive cabinet
tang is a community leader of haskell
and pearl and a core member of gov zero
please enjoy the discussion
thank you for being here for this
conversation today
i think
if we want to start talking about
technology infrastructure and
biopolitics today it seems hard not to
start with facebook
which is of course a company that
operates like a nation state with two
you know they just said 2.8 billion
monthly active users as of second
quarter uh this year
and a bigger economy than a lot of
nations and which is synonymous with its
own technology stack
and it faced sort of dual national
security issues recently
with a bunch of leaks that described how
aware it is of its own you know
psychological and political damage that
its products have on it uh their users
and also a network outage which brought
down its services for itself and
all the subsidiary services like
instagram and whatsapp
so mr tang maybe we can
start with you and you know someone
who's worked you work really hard to
on commons and open source and
keeping digital infrastructures in the
commons i'm wondering if you have any
perspective on what we can you know what
we should take away from the recent
facebook activity
well in taiwan since we invested quite
heavily in the civic infrastructure in
the digital realm for the past few years
so i would say that our e-petitioning
our deliberative digital democracy stuff
was not impacted during the hours that
facebook went down well partly because
it's during our midnight but still
and also uh i would say that because
people recognize that in order to have a
politically fighting effect um there is
the digital equivalent of town halls of
museums university campuses
and so on where a civilized conversation
can be had
and people go to facebook of course
taiwan has
probably more facebook accounts than
population
but
they'd go there for entertainment it's
just like we will never hold a town hall
in a smoke-filled nightclub uh with
private bouncers uh intoxicating drinks
people have to shout to get hurt and
things like that um there's with all due
respect a place for the entertainment
sector but it's not for public
discussion
yeah i'm
calling in from california where
uh facebook is located um and we haven't
invested in our civic digital
infrastructure uh in the same way uh not
not to say that a digital infrastructure
that
plays the part or pretends to be a kind
of public realm has not received
investment obviously it's received quite
a lot of investment and we've built this
out and built that out in this regard i
say we the we the californians with some
um
some trepidation i suppose
i i suppose i'll come at it from a
different angle from barry's question
about facebook as a
um
as a kind of
a platform that operates at a
transnational scale
um to some extent um operating
above or below
uh state jurisdiction uh in its in in
how it is its formal and de facto
uh sovereignty uh might might operate
um and it to some extent i i guess in
this regard i i see it as um
uh uh
indicative of of a of a sort of larger
macro trend uh sort of perhaps in terms
of the
the direction in which um
uh digital platforms might go uh in in
both a good way in a bad way uh in a
sort of positive or potentially negative
light or at least directions that could
go in either directions i think quite
clearly though i should say that
i think that the in a way facebook is
facebook as an example is fundamentally
broken facebook is
it was fundamentally broken at the
beginning that it's its model of a
society
is one in which society is understood as
individual liberal individual users
separate
atomized
and then society is then understood as
simply the multiplication and
aggregation of these atomic
individuals with wants and needs and
this curiously this curious image of a
kind of of a privatized individual data
i don't think this is not the model of
society that we understand from
anthropology sociology it's not how
societies work
and so i think to a certain extent
there's a way in which the contraption
of facebook is sort of destined to fall
apart in other kinds of ways based on
this fundamental misapprehension but i
guess one of the things that i'm very
i'm still interested to certain extent
around around this and would certainly
appreciate
um
audrey's uh insight on this is to the
extent to which facebook is a
transnational platform
um it's not it wasn't produced by a
single nation state essentially uh it it
operates across boundaries
uh national boundaries um in different
kinds of ways and
one of the ways in which we have seen
uh more positive versions of of
investment in civic infrastructure has
been on let's say a municipal level
one city building kinds of things
or occasionally in your case at this
level of a state of a nation state that
is able to do this in other words that
the public
that invests in it that would build from
it that would benefit from it is a
public with a pretty old-fashioned kind
of jurisdiction
built into it the citizens of this place
or that place and
i wonder
thinking of you know wondering aloud uh
in a certain sense if there are ways of
thinking about
digital civic infrastructures that are
transnational that are
that that are that are not bound to one
at one particular
jurisdiction but that have the same kind
of
um that have a cosmopolitan vision at
the scope at the scale or scope of
facebook without but also but with a
with a vision of what a society is and
what a society should be that is
considerably less pathological
uh than the one that our friends in
menlo park have given us
well the digital public infrastructures
that i had in mind especially when
facebook went down that's very active in
taiwan say the ptp which is sometimes
compared to reddit but really there's
not much in common right ptt is uh gplv3
it's free software as in freedom
collaboratively governed
and it's been running under um academic
network subsidy for 25 years now uh and
it's a it's a global forum i mean mostly
uh the conversation centers around
taiwan politics and you know whatever
other public issues but the contributors
come from all sorts of different
jurisdictions uh and ptt um only insists
that you can authenticate yourself by
paying one taiwan dollar to its bank
account which it probably refunds but it
doesn't quite care uh where you are
like in the physical plane so i i would
say that uh most of our conversations uh
takes place on forums that doesn't
really care about citizenship or
participatory budgeting our citizens
initiative
is maybe not called a citizen initiative
residents and people who anyway can
authenticate using the sms are all free
to to participate so
all those different tools which are open
source are swiftly then adapted in other
parts of the world and because they are
federated in nature in the kind of
source code contributions and so on so
we immediately uh gain kind of uh in my
mind it's more like a link graph not a
place graph
of people of similar
values that binds together uh toward
this kind of digital commons or
re-decentralized commons
thank
you as you know i've just
recently published a book about the
pandemic uh called revenge of the real
on post-pandemic politics and one of the
the arguments that the book makes
is that
um
and maybe this to some extent just part
of the experience of the pandemic here
from from california
is that the we can understand and read
the pandemic as a kind of crisis of
governance particularly in the west
um that we have these wealthy
technologically sophisticated societies
um that were
found themselves politically and indeed
culturally unable to respond
uh
as effectively as really that they
should it should have
um and obviously in particular a lot of
populist administrations really did the
worst globally speaking to not just
trump but also
bolsonaro and modi and johnson and the
rest of this
um and many have interpreted this as a
kind of bad sign for democracy
and
one of the things that i also was a bit
troubled by was the way in which
the response of east asian uh
democracies that in many cases and your
work being exemplary of this were far
more
effective in in many ways
but i think really misunderstood in the
west and they're understood as being
somehow more authoritarian
uh or even totalitarian than they then
um and i'm sure this is based on all
kinds of
um
uh
you know ignorance and misunderstandings
around this as well but
i just wanted to ask as someone who was
you know intimately involved
in taiwan's comparatively successful
response
what do you take as the key lessons um
to be taken from the pandemic
more generally
in terms of let's say the future of
governance more broadly if we were to
take the pandemic as a kind of test run
for many of the challenges that we'll
face going forward what really should we
be should we make sure that we've
learned from this experience
sean
um yeah we've never had a lockdown so i
i don't think there's anything
totalitarian about the uh taiwanese
playbook so um yeah and we're we're
speaking now for i think five days now
six days uh with no local community
cases so if we're not post pandemic
we're probably postponed uh the pandemic
now that the key to uh achieve this i
believe is to maximize trust in the
citizens or as i prefer to call it the
social sector and indeed the term social
sector didn't gain popularity in taiwan
until uh around the turn of century a
really large earthquake that mobilized
uh the previously unconnected uh phase
systems uh social entrepreneurs
charities and so on that are more
municipal or local based uh but because
they had to respond to this sudden
disaster of earthquake together around
the 10th century so they formed this um
ad hoc rc if you will uh that very
effectively disseminates knowledge in a
culturally sensitive way adapting it to
the local knowledge and wisdom uh and so
even
during the earthquake when the municipal
governments publish simply um not very
accurate numbers uh they're large
charities and so on they publish numbers
that are far more trusted and this
continues to this day like uh whenever
durant has asked when it's the g charity
publisher number they automatically gain
more legitimacy than any municipal
government or even central government so
the point here is that the digital
infrastructure is here to connect the
social sector it's not to automate away
the social sector when i explained that
uh during the pandemic last year there's
more than 2 million calls to this
toll-free number 1922 where anyone can
place a call and get their questions
onset and so when people were surprised
that they don't go to a voicemail ever
and they were picked up by either
professional call center operators or
volunteers from the city from the social
sector and for example when a young boy
called saying last april hey your
rationale mask which is great but all i
got was pink ones which is not great and
all the boys in my class have navy blue
masks i don't want to wear pink to
school but the very next day in the 2
p.m cecc central epidemic sunset press
conference all the medical officers were
pink masks and uh minister chen the
commander even said that pink panther uh
was his childhood hero or something so
basically uh the boy became the most hit
boy every night because only he has the
color that the heroes wear and hero's
hero where so i would say this is about
trusting the citizens with this kind of
message in real time imagine if the
minister chen took like 60 days to
respond then of course we would not have
this chance of not just gender
mainstreaming but also making uh mask
fashion statements the pink mask was
very trending for quite a while in the
rainbow mask and whatever
so it's just it's a dynamic between the
a kind of
uh citizen-centric and decentralized
uh
infrastructure that you describe here is
which is very different as i suggest in
the ways in which
um
i i think the taiwan's response or east
asia's ones in general has been uh
understood in the west i think part of
the crisis part of the
the
there was the crisis of governance and
then there was the sort of refusal to
learn from the crisis of government i
think part of the refusal to learn was
to actually
understand what other other people were
doing if this was a sort of big
experiment to comparative governance
um
and italy wasn't doing very well early
on texas wasn't doing florida whatever
that the the ability to actually learn
what works
um
has we has not been taken up and i this
is this is i guess the thing that i find
you know even more
a little bit more disturbing in this
regard and
specifically it has had to do with uh
suggested this question of
the role of technology
as a as a form of social infrastructure
even epidemiological technology and just
to say in asking for your comment
in the west this discussion was sort of
fell into sort of two camps the way i
would sort of take it two kinds of
extremes like either on the one hand
there was a kind of
um
evangelical enthusiasm for the adoption
of whatever we have at hand as quickly
as possible phone tracking apps or
whatever um
and that this would
solve
this one in essence as you suggested
automate the social sector like we don't
need the social sector because this will
be solved with the app
or on the other hand
uh
maybe a kind of and this goes to your
question of trust
i think quite clearly that a sense that
any form
of
epidemiological sensing uh and the way
in which society might know what's going
on within itself
is a slippery slope to some kind of
uh
biomedical
totalitarianism or something and so must
be resisted on all terms and so
participation is resistant participation
is not only not entered into but it's
actively
um the sort of that there's a certa that
is actively refused and resisted in one
in one sense around this as well and so
i wonder just for those who are viewing
um
who are watching saying if you could uh
explain a little bit uh recount a little
bit for us your role
uh in in the development of taiwan's own
response and
maybe some comment a little bit on on
how different the logic of how to
respond and even what the problem might
be uh than than the characterization
i've laid out if you think it's
appropriate
sure
i'll just use one example from dismay
from this tweet uh from tim copeland
that start with omg exclamation mark uh
and uh that's when we introduce a what
we call 192 smas based qr code scanning
contact tracing technology and so it
works like this
if you have a iphone say in your lock
screen if you swipe uh without unlocking
you get into this camera mode
and once you point it to this qr code it
sends a
message
and then you click send and that's it
like this is literally in two seconds uh
how one in taiwan checks ins to public
values uh during the height of our real
first wave the only wave uh in may and
there's quite a few
nuances here first of all 1922 is
already a trusted telephone number it's
toll-free it doesn't cost you anything
to send the sms we explain very clearly
that this random code is rotated out
deleted after 28 days and most crucially
it doesn't go to the government and it
doesn't go to any multinational um
company that also happens to say
advertisement it's kind of a sticky note
in your telecom provider so whichever
telecom carrier you choose uh they're
going to store it for 28 days and then
delete it so in the more than a quarter
billion messages sent since may since we
introduced it only around 1 million gets
accessed by professional contact tracers
and each and every individual can look
at
the record of auditing records of who
exactly uh access those records for the
past 28 days at any time on a public
website and this entire design is not
government technology it's co-created by
a community of practitioners that's uh
very care very much about privacy
enhancing techniques and so on uh the
civic technologists called themselves
gazera or g0v
and so they insist that each and every
sms here uh have to attach this node
that says for epidemic control only uh
and so when a whistleblower a judge that
said hey somebody wiretapping a major uh
fraud crime uh the police accidentally
look at this and want to use it for
investigation there was a huge backlash
and then within a couple weeks we
interpreted saying no this is not
communication because you're not talking
to a real human when you're sending this
sms the vast majority of which just got
deleted after 28 days it's just like
appending a note to yourself so it
should not be wiretap and after that
it's not wiped out so a real-time
feedback system like this i believe is a
good alternative really the only
alternative to over centralization in
the state and over centralization
multinational companies
in your in your sense how you would
characterize the difference between the
way in which taiwan dealt with this i
mean sort of a big picture level um
between taiwan dealt with this and the
ways in which it was dealt with in other
other areas either right next door and
prc or anywhere else that you're sort of
familiar with because
as you mentioned
you're not in lockdown you haven't been
in lockdown and people are amazed amazed
to know that
right next door to
china where the outbreak began like tiny
was never locked up school stayed open
it was this
all of this was in a way unnecessary
like we could have done this better and
i i wonder from your sense like what
where the where you see the sort of the
patterns of difference and what you what
you would what you attributed to
yeah on the highest level uh as i said
it's about trusting citizens maximally
uh and in a slightly more tactical level
i i'd say we're faster more fair and
more fun
so basically the the idea of foster fun
as the kind of three pillars of social
innovation uh really allows our
clarifications our scientific response
our rational deliberation and
discussions uh to have a higher basic
reproduction value than conspiracy
theories so that we don't suffer from
the revenge of the imaginary right so
the idea here is that uh when people
find it more fun more participatory to
remix cute dog memes uh about using mask
to protect one's own face against one's
own unwashed hand and so on then all
those
anxiety all those um kind of suppressed
outrage and so on go to a creative
almost comedic
artistic
out outlets uh that then uh spreads the
signs faster than the conspiracy
theories and disinformation
very interesting
thank you i have more to ask but i'd
like to not i would not really be the
the only sure
because there's humor over a rumor by
the way which is quite political humor
over rumor that's the sentence this is
yeah that's right we need we need more
of this i think
yep
um
that's pretty interesting about the
you know as a
kind of gray area as an arts
organization we deal with this kind you
know creativity and how art and you know
i count memes as part of that
are
can be part of this dialogue and have
kind of functional roles and you know
actual things going on in the world i
wonder um
clearly there are also memes in the
united states you know
is there any and i would say that
um that this idea of like trusting the
citizen is pretty interesting and almost
seems like it wouldn't apply here in the
same way
so i'm wondering if maybe i'm
in what ways can we dig into that
because
so for example on the state level
what what was done to increa if anything
was done to encourage that kind of meme
activity or direct it in the ways
that you wanted it to go
because one assumes that there could
also be a lot of memes out there that
were
at odds with what the government would
hope the response of the citizenry would
be which is certainly the case here but
that's entirely fine
i mean uh all of our public
communication materials are under
creative commons which already says that
you can reproduce it in the wrong
context really there is no wrong context
uh and and i i would argue that uh the
people who want to manufacture this
information wouldn't care about your
copyright notice anyway so it's like the
old crypto wars right if you outlaw
crypto only the criminal have crypto uh
and so uh the the same goes for the
cultural commons if we put everything in
the commerce certainly people who want
to make this information will use them
but it also empowers and anyone really
who like cute dogs and so on uh to remix
and by and large i think the uh more
artful co-creative processional uh use
of social media eventually triumphs over
this more anti-social use of social
media but if you limit vr copyright and
threaten pursue and things like that all
the legitimate remixes then what ends up
is the people who are operating extra
jurisdictionally and don't care about
your laws anyway
was there any kind of problem with
misinformation or disinformation uh
within uh in terms of the public
discussion and i wonder whether that was
more at the beginning at the end and
what the
what was it about and and how was it
dealt with
yeah we we countered the pandemic with
no lockdowns and so we also countered
the info damage with no takedowns
and i would also say that our counter
pandemic playbook um is really a
reapplication of the principles that our
counter infodamic playbook
which we
made in around 2018-19 which kind of
exactly led to to the pandemic times
and the ideas of fossil fuel fund
applies doubling to countering the the
info damage because if you don't respond
within 16 minutes of a trending this
information then
all hope is lost right it's already made
into the public consciousness um and so
uh starting 2018 19 uh all the
ministries in taiwan are required to uh
have this triple two principle right uh
within two hours on average 60 minutes
um
at least two funny pictures uh and each
carrying less than 200 characters uh and
that's kind of the counter meme and we
work with um participation offices
people who are themselves comedians or
work closely with professional comedians
on such messaging so this is one early
example before the pandemic there was a
popular misinformation that said the
state is going to find you 1 million
entity for priming your hair multiple
times a week
and then within a couple of hours
actually less than 60 minutes this meme
appeared from the premier's office out
of the cabinet that says it's not true
and then with a younger version of the
head of cabinet who said i may be bought
now but i still used to have hair and i
would not punish people with hair and a
fine print that says what we've
introduced really is a labrum
requirement for hair products and then a
hair dryer with the printer as it looks
now that says however if you plumb your
hair many times a week um
you will not damage your your bank
account but it would damage your hair
and just look at me now for what will
happen to your hair now this is quite
humorous that this obviously had a
higher basic reproduction rate and
people who laughed about it kind of left
it off so there's no um kind of outrage
turned into vengefulness discrimination
and someone left
for them so we call it vaccination of
the mind once people laughed and shared
this meme the original rumor has no
potency anymore uh within kind of the
memetic replicating uh potential but of
course the comedians can only focus on
few things at a time every time so what
we rely on is like people voluntarily
flocking incoming email as a spam and
sending to spam house so the spammers
next email lends to the junk mail uh box
not the inbox and so we've got uh the
leading trend micro our antivirus
company the g zero v community has this
colfax spot and and so on that you can't
just forward um end to end encrypted
it's like uh signal or whatsapp in town
it's called line you can forward a
suspected misinformation to the spot
which then offers real-time
clarification via a crowdsource
wiki-like editing process and vetted by
the
professional journalists in the
television center and the beauty of this
is none of this is state operated right
it's it's firmly squarely within the
social sector like spam house is so we
basically use the counter spawn playbook
to to counter this information and later
on this proved to be essential in
spreading the mimetic messages about
science uh and we even convinced our
vice president uh dr chen general
to record uh some of the massive online
courses uh that then went viral he's not
just our vice president also author of
the epidemiology textbook authority or
epic movement
so let me clarify that so you would say
that the the ministries themselves um
follow the the three f's uh strategy
were able to respond an example that you
showed was a response by one of the
ministries within 20 minutes
um but it's it's not a it it's you
it's not a
you wouldn't characterize this as a
government uh as a state state
initiative
but rather a if i understand it a social
sector initiative in your terms
in which the state is the state is
participating because we cannot take
anything down we're just participating
as as a creator right as a fellow
creator we do not enjoy privilege over
other creators and the power of the
state manufactured memes is not in the
state channels themselves but rather in
the remixers that then take the meme uh
and spread it to their local community
but in what way did the states sponsor
these did the state pay for the
infrastructure at all or help organize
the building of it or
help pay or organize the creatives that
made the memes like in what in what way
was the support done from the state
level yeah the international
fact-checking network has strict rules
when it comes to party or state donation
so we're not
funding any of the infrastructure level
work similarly the cofax project from
the dev0 project doesn't have any state
funding and so on and trend micro is a
large enough antivirus company probably
doesn't mean state funding anyway so uh
there is a uh ecosystem although full
disclosure because trent micros team uh
won a award uh for international counter
disinformation information
organized by by your state department so
in a sense it received state funding in
the form of a trophy a prize or
something
in any case uh what i'm trying to say is
that uh the ministries and their
comedians they are of course paid funded
uh the preservation of our career public
servants is part of their job but it's
the part of their job to engage the
commons with the rule of the commons
amplifying the commons this is what i
call a people public private partnership
that is to say the people set the norms
just like the norms around qr-based
contact tracing saying no to aggregated
data storage uh to the state or to
multinational companies and what we did
is just to engage them on their rules
and then turning around convincing the
private sector to implement the norms
already set by the social sector and
convincing non-domestic
players in the private sector like
facebook uh saying that they have also
to comply with the say the honest
advertisement during our election period
or the social and political
advertisements uh need to publish in
real time their funding sources and
things like that well that's because
what the that's the social sectors
demand and they occupied uh the the
parliament literally to fight this and
this is the norm here and the ptt has
already implemented that so facebook
really uh the the kind of trade
negotiation with facebook is not that
will pass a law to ban you we've never
done that but rather you may face social
sanction if you go against the social
world
and what kind of what kind of sanction
might that be well for example uh people
who uh boycott facebook for not uh
publishing the extra jurisdictionally
sponsored advertisement people who
boycott posting advertisement yeah
and i think in 2019 power is one if not
the first jurisdiction where facebook
just just caved in and say okay let's
just publish like taiwan's control your
national auditing office or the extra
jurisdictionally and even domestic
advertisement during the election season
interesting so i i wanted to ask you a
little more on the um
the three the people public and private
dynamic here as well
i wonder if you could articulate for us
in your turn why it's so important that
uh the state is not involved
in these initiatives for
what my just seems like the governance
of
the public the public realm in from
the way in which for example many of the
western european countries
dealt with it
the social norm to a certain extent was
a presumption that the role of the state
is to
have some kind of conducting role in
this as well and i wonder if you could
talk a little bit obviously across the
strait and drc as well but i wonder if
you could talk a little bit why it's
important that the state is only one
player not uh
not sort of the supervisor so to speak
yeah it because uh we are a pluralistic
democracy and there's multiple different
ways that state can uh play its part but
uh especially during elections if we
control the fact checking then we would
not have the effective response uh for
countering this particular form of this
information
which in a quote said the cia made two
special invisible inks for ballots so uh
you vote for one of the three
presidential candidates your vote would
disappear uh and uh dr tying one's vote
will appear and so on it was one of the
more popular uh trending this
information during our election day
something that advanced democracy like
the u.s never had anyway so uh what we
did though in taiwan is that instead of
the state uh pushing any particular form
of propaganda or clarification we simply
radically opened the accounting process
taiwan has only paper-based uh voting
and uh only in-person paper-based voting
there's no advance or mail in voting so
people after uh they voted they remain
and we open up for uh live streaming and
for recording are all the accounting
processes in each and every of the
accounting booths
and each of the major parties have their
own apps of real-time telling and the
youtubers made it kind of their their
job right to to stream the otherwise
foreign accounting process um and so
whenever a youtuber livestreams from
accounting value station uh there's a
way to very quickly go back to the
recordings of the disputed uh places in
cebuane viata political party-sponsored
apps and there's um quite a few of those
youtubers um and when all of those
youtubers of different political parties
agree in their accounts no matter which
political party affiliation for end
they're probably just uh their numbers
and they're entertaining are reporting
more than this trending this information
so again this is about notice and then
put out a public notice that's
participatory it's not about taking down
anything in particular but imagine if
the state funds this infrastructure then
it will be kind of working in paradox
with each other because um dr sanguin is
campaigning for the second time so
basically she has a
kind of paradoxical um
relation with this kind of digital
public infrastructure if this
infrastructure is paid by the state
government
i wonder if i could ask you then what
um i mean you're
minister you're in a sense you're you're
both part of the social sector and the
state sector in this regard and you're
you're you're all three p's and a
certain sort of as well yes
what uh what do you see i mean how would
you characterize you know in a versus
the proper role of
digital civic infrastructure that is
funded and deployed and administered by
the states i i
it you know there's an all manner of
different discussions about the way in
which
uh
the
the sensing and modeling and
comprehension of what is going on in a
society and how a society it's
functioning in sort of work and
long-term planning
long you know and sort of the long-term
foresight that that
um more ad-hoc groups are are not
necessarily well structured to to to
deal with the kinds of things we we sort
of lean on states to do
what do you see as the proper you know
the the as
i put this
as the fundamental infrastructure upon
which uh all complex societies depend
becomes increasingly computational
where do you see the proper role then
for the parts of this transformation
that are
uh appropriately state driven or state
administers they participate versus
those that really should stay
uh on the people side of this or in
terms of the norm setting and in terms
of the long-term planning yeah i mean
the state still for from the moment uh
is the main producer of regulations and
laws
uh whereas the social sector is the
producer of habits and norms so uh and
norm first approach says
that the state should only
um play a amplifying role it should not
create
the data collection points that wasn't
part of the norm to begin with in the
name of the pandemic that's perhaps one
of the most important heuristic uh
during the entire pandemic
that taiwan's model implies because if
we invent new data collection touch
points that are simply not there nothing
like that exist before uh during
the pre-pandemic times then the cyber
security parameters the privacy
parameters are completely unknown
instead it's basically saying trust us
without trusting the citizens right and
and that's a big no no because then uh
people have all sorts of ways to view
the conspiracy theories because
otherwise the state should have thought
about this before so in a sense because
we've never declared a state of
emergency in taiwan during this pandemic
everything we did need to be part of the
already
parliament approved
publicly debated
pre-approved norm based
use of technology which is why we rely
so much on the national health care
system on the sms system and so on not
because they're the best fit but because
people already put trust in those
fundamental infrastructure that's been
around since the previous current virus
since 2003 right so so the point here is
that this complementarity
to existing social sector
infrastructures is where we're powering
our budget and our efforts in just like
when we're doing broadband as a human
right we're not saying that everybody
have to use um i don't know low earth
orbit satellite links or whatever but we
use uh the existing infrastructure
already there in the uh more rural areas
and remote islands and so on but we
commit ourselves saying there will be uh
and there was um sufficient funding out
from 5g spectrum auction and things like
that to make sure that at any point in
taiwan even 4000 meters high you're
guaranteed to have 10 megabits per
second otherwise it's my fault like
personally so so i think that is the
role that they should play
i see i see
and this is quite obviously quite um
quite different than the role of the
state has played across the strait on in
prc
uh um and i i would i can't
bypass the opportunity to speak with you
to i can't pass the opportunity to ask
you to comment a little bit on
what you see as the um
uh comparative successes and failures uh
of the way in which uh the mainland
dealt with this phenom dealt with this
phenomenon it's obviously
extraordinarily different
but i wonder how you would characterize
it
[Music]
yeah when december 31st when dr
leonella's message
on the 2019 last day literally spread to
ptt the civic infrastructure in taiwan
uh i think it also made ways to other
parts
of social media because our ones are
more pro-social i guess uh we're the
only uh jurisdiction in which that dr
lee wants message the seven science
cases in the financial markets actually
made a policy impact right we started
health inspections for all flight
passengers coming in from the very next
day the first day of 2020 and that's
because the triage of the contributors
on ptt uh in a decidedly pro-social
manner on this whistleblowing message
now compared to people in uh who
literally has no way to have access to
this message
because of the lack of journalistic
freedom uh because dr lee wanna himself
was censored by the police station
unless uh and so i guess all the kind of
sudden lockdowns all those
very top-down shutdown takedown um
infrastructures that the prc has built
also reinforce itself because without a
thriving uh collective intelligence
journalism and the social sector there
really is no way to know what's going on
and then when you want to put epidemic
control to a situation where you
literally don't know what's going on
then really the only recourse is to go
to this more top-down takedown shutdown
routes but taiwan was able to choose a
different route not only because nobody
wants to go back to the stars lockdown
in 2003 but also because we had a choice
because we have this collective
intelligence that can inform um us quite
um with the wisdom of the crowds what's
actually going on and what should we do
so uh
in summary uh i believe that
the collective intelligence that's the
ptt
acted on the stars seven cases in
financial market warning around the turn
from 2018 to 2020 the first day of 2020
because dr leonel's message literally
saved how many people we started house
inspection for all five passengers
coming in from hunt because it was
triage on the pro social civic
infrastructure but in the prc where
people have literally no way to get dr
leonel's message because it was censored
there was no other choice when you know
nothing about what's really going on
then your only recourse is probably just
top down take down shutdown whatever and
so i think power benefits from being a
liberal democracy a pluralistic
democracy because we not only know
what's going on thanks to the civic
journalists but also we know what's what
should we do thanks to the specific
scientists
i wonder if we want to talk about uh
surveillance and tracking a little bit
which is a prominent part of the book or
i think
sort of the sensing layer of the stack
as you talk about it ben
[Music]
and
you know we kind of had a couple of
responses in the us one you know one is
that
tracking phone and tracking technology
was gonna save everything you know there
was a californian state app that i
remember being developed and we had like
google and apple sharing data to try and
have a tracking response and then of
course there's an anti-surveillance
response that's uh
kind of a you know
big data don't track everybody or it's
going to be
you're going to have all sorts of
dystopian outcomes
um
wondering from you know your perspective
in taiwan how how
what were the uses of
sort of surveillance and tracking and
how is that
messaged and accepted by the citizenry
to keep from having
the worst kind of responses to it
but what if i could clarify just the
point one moment
was simply that um
uh
i i think a lot of it comes down to just
sort of the definition of what do we
mean by surveillance in this regard and
it was really more of a critique to a
certain extent of a rather i think blunt
and overly
simplistic uh connotation of that term
either in sort of pro or con and
in that sense in this one of the
problems that we as barry as you know in
in california was
under sensing that people couldn't get
tested that our health care system is
not inclusive it's not equitable and we
part of the reason we as as what he was
saying you know what's going on so you
can act we didn't know what was going on
we were not able to test people and so
we were not able to develop you know
granular epidemiological models and so
specific intervention was impossible and
so
as they're saying
you're when you don't know what's going
on you're left with no choice but to
assume it's everywhere and shut
everything down and so i i think my
point was less okay surveillance is good
but rather that
this discourse around
surveillance as such has in a way has
contributed to a situation where
collective intelligence is more is
almost impossible and much more
difficult than it should be and we need
a different conversation that was really
the point to be made so with that i'll
pass along yeah and then i would uh
describe taiwan's participatory
self-surveillance thing as uh at steve
montz out uh seuss villains right uh
kind of watching from from under uh from
the bottom uh not watching from this uh
sky net thing right so um what i'm
trying to say is that soos valence or
participatory self-surveillance
is crucially
important in a surveillance system that
this entire thing is radically
transparent and easy to understand
so when we introduced the real contact
content tracing system uh last year this
is about venues putting kind of a piece
of paper
where anyone doesn't need to fill in
their real name just a handle
and
a way for them to be contacted like an
email address which could be a you know
proton mail or a private relay this year
or whatever uh or a a phone number that
could be a telephone number in the
landline or uh mobile so so the point
here is that people entrust the venue
with this minimal contact numbers and
then you never have to uh submit it to
the government or to any other company
actually they shred it after 28 days of
no local confirmed cases which is most
of last year um and so the point here is
that even in the nightclubs in even in
the host and hosted spots uh that
remained operating for most of last year
they're okay with this because they is
in their best interest to keep the
privacy the private details of their uh
patrons and the patrons well they you
know the venues already know them anyway
so this information is not going
anywhere until if this venue is shut
down because of a local outbreak in that
very venue uh and otherwise this
information is not going anywhere so the
sms-based contextualizing just extends
this idea and um take the telecom
operators as kind of the venue uh and
it's not compulsory so you can always
just uh go back and people innovated
there too right uh people carried small
kind of name cards that are synonymous
people apply this kind of ink stamp uh
and so on uh especially for people with
no phones whatsoever and that's still a
preferred way to enter independence if
you don't like to use itself and even if
you have a feature film like no
smartphone um you just text the 15
digits that i just showed uh in your
built-in text sms um
function of the feature phone to 1922 a
trusted number again that completes the
check in so because it's so transparent
and so easy to understand people form
their own physicians on whether they
want to be informed when there's a local
outbreak or not or they go back to the
paper best method which is completely
fine
and what is the response when there is
an outbreak who is what is the
institutional level among the three p's
uh what happens when there is an
outbreak in terms of the the carrier is
the what the role of the carrier the
role of the state or any other health
the health administration like what what
is the sequence of sort of chain of
responsibility to to to
to make an intervention of the the
municipal contact tracers the city
contact traces usually employed by the
local health bureau
initiates the contact tracing and
interview process so they physically go
to the venue to collect the paper
reports
and they also of course ask the five
major telecoms of the sms
um trail but those checking trails
doesn't come with location information
these are just 15 digit random code
right so they have to also make a
separate inquiry to the qr code maker uh
then to uh complete the picture so in
information science terms this is a
multi-party computation meaning that no
none of the three or four parties have
the complete picture of the person's
whereabouts and without the other
parties collaboration well there there
really simply is no surveillance market
market capitalism value of the shard of
information that one house it just
looked like gibberish right so uh but
when the uh by law authorized uh contact
tracer get hold of this information and
piece them together instead of in other
jurisdictions where it takes on average
uh 24 hours to get this picture together
let alone the interviews and foreign in
taiwan all this process takes less than
24 minutes
24 minutes how how so i mean after they
go and after they physically go and get
this you said you picked this up then
this aggregation processes it's
completely automatic
right so there is a contact tracer
assistance platform
and they just fill in those details
there and then it pieces together the
multi-party uh inputs and then shows via
a map a complete picture of the
overlapping
path and trails and suggested contacts
and with the click the button one can
then get a telephone or contact or email
of everyone who intersected uh who check
in on them uh venue right after or
sometimes after depending on airborne
transmission uh of this confirmed case
and then all of these people are then uh
notified and quarantined in place or
things like that
i see and it's the quarantine is
voluntary i'm just i'm curious on this
whether or is there a
measure the place of the quarantine is
uh
you can choose right a quarantine hotel
a quarantine center uh and things like
that
but the quarantine itself the 14 days is
compulsory and we pay you
around 100 u.s dollars a day for your
trouble but if you break out of the
quarantine then you pay us back i think
a thousand times that or something
for our trouble
i see i see and and so i'm very curious
about this um
the quarantine centers themselves this
is also something that i think is you
know something that you know that
western countries used to do quite a lot
um would put the people you know you
move the people who need to be
quarantined to
a centralized facility and they
quarantine there and there may be some
strange camaraderie that appears with
you know
uh you know there's been romance novels
written about you know falling in love
under
quarantine and the rest of this as well
but
you know
a society that's so atomized and
individual the i the individualistic the
idea of actually sort of going out of
your house to sort of to spend this time
with with other people seems so strange
i wonder what
tell us a bit about the cultures of
these places
sure uh they're four-star and five-star
hotels mostly that didn't have much
international visit us anyway uh and
then um
into into kind of a 14-day vacation
place with um sometimes with also you
know
small gyms and exercising equipment so i
i guess it's it's it felt like a
vacation and i'm not
just just kind of um playing down that
this suddenly have to leave that the
place you work and live uh for 14 days i
mean this is quite traumatic uh for for
frankly speaking a lot of people but uh
we try to make it something that's
that's worth um worth sharing afterwards
uh and that is to say i remember when
there was a quarantine center near the
young mountain and i received this email
from someone quarantined there saying uh
mr you promised broadband is a human
right but on this room near the yummy
mountain i don't get broadband this
email took me uh five hours to ride to
stand
and my human right is being compromised
it cannot be watched streaming video
and then i'm like sorry we apologize
profusely and within 14 days we've
installed a repeater there uh so they
can enjoy streaming video but by that
time that person is already out of
currency so so he made a point of
driving back measuring speed test posing
message
and things like that
this is this act very very engaged
citizen
all right cheers um and that was really
good conversation and look forward to uh
continue our email and if you need
anything just let me know and uh we plan
to to post the video that you edited
under creative commons uh after you air
if that's okay with you
okay
see you then lift low and prosper bye